Political science is the scientific study of politics which is a social science dealing with the analysis and implementation of systems of governance and its impact on societies.Modern political science can generally be divided into the five sub-disciplines of political philosophy, political methodology, comparative politics, international relations, public policy and public administration. 


== History ==


=== Origin ===
Political science is a social science dealing with systems of governance and power, and the analysis of political activities, political institutions, political thought and behavior, and associated constitutions and laws.As a social science, contemporary political science started to take shape in the latter half of the 19th century and began to separate itself from political philosophy and history. Into the late 19th century, it was still uncommon that political science was considered a distinct field from history. The term "political science" was not always distinguished from political philosophy, and the modern discipline has a clear set of antecedents including also moral philosophy, political economy, political theology, history, and other fields concerned with normative determinations of what ought to be and with deducing the characteristics and functions of the ideal state.
Generally, classical political philosophy is primarily defined by a concern for Hellenic and Enlightenment thought, political scientists are also marked by a great concern for "modernity" and the contemporary nation state, along with the study of classical thought, and as such share more terminology with sociologists (e.g., structure and agency).

The advent of political science as a university discipline was marked by the creation of university departments and chairs with the title of political science arising in the late 19th century. The designation "political scientist" is commonly used to denote someone with a doctorate or master's degree in the field. Integrating political studies of the past into a unified discipline is ongoing, and the history of political science has provided a rich field for the growth of both normative and positive political science, with each part of the discipline sharing some historical predecessors. The American Political Science Association and the American Political Science Review were founded in 1903 and 1906, respectively, in an effort to distinguish the study of politics from economics and other social phenomena. APSA membership rose from 204 in 1904 to 1,462 in 1915. APSA members played a key role in setting up political science departments that were distinct from history, philosophy, law, sociology, and economics.The journal Political Science Quarterly was established in 1886 by the Academy of Political Science. In the inaugural issue of Political Science Quarterly, Munroe Smith defined political science as "the science of the state. Taken in this sense, it includes the organization and functions of the state, and the relation of states one to another."As part of a UNESCO initiative to promote political science in the late 1940s, the International Political Science Association was founded in 1949, as well as national associations in France in 1949, Britain in 1950, and West Germany in 1951.


=== Behavioural revolution and new institutionalism ===
In the 1950s and the 1960s, a behavioral revolution stressing the systematic and rigorously scientific study of individual and group behavior swept the discipline. A focus on studying political behavior, rather than institutions or interpretation of legal texts, characterized early behavioral political science, including work by Robert Dahl, Philip Converse, and in the collaboration between sociologist Paul Lazarsfeld and public opinion scholar Bernard Berelson.
The late 1960s and early 1970s witnessed a takeoff in the use of deductive, game-theoretic formal modelling techniques aimed at generating a more analytical corpus of knowledge in the discipline. This period saw a surge of research that borrowed theory and methods from economics to study political institutions, such as the United States Congress, as well as political behavior, such as voting. William H. Riker and his colleagues and students at the University of Rochester were the main proponents of this shift.
Despite considerable research progress in the discipline based on all the kinds of scholarship discussed above, it has been observed that progress toward systematic theory has been modest and uneven.


=== 21st century ===
In 2000, the Perestroika Movement in political science was introduced as a reaction against what supporters of the movement called the mathematicization of political science. Those who identified with the movement argued for a plurality of methodologies and approaches in political science and for more relevance of the discipline to those outside of it.Some evolutionary psychology theories argue that humans have evolved a highly developed set of psychological mechanisms for dealing with politics. However, these mechanisms evolved for dealing with the small group politics that characterized the ancestral environment and not the much larger political structures in today's world. This is argued to explain many important features and systematic cognitive biases of current politics.


== Overview ==
Political science is a social study concerning the allocation and transfer of power in decision making, the roles and systems of governance including governments and international organizations, political behaviour, and public policies. It measures the success of governance and specific policies by examining many factors, including stability, justice, material wealth, peace, and public health. Some political scientists seek to advance positive theses (which attempt to describe how things are, as opposed to how they should be) by analysing politics; others advance normative theses, such as by making specific policy recommendations. The study of politics and policies can be closely connected—for example, in comparative analyses of which types of political institutions tend to produce certain types of policies. Political science provides analysis and predictions about political and governmental issues. Political scientists examine the processes, systems and political dynamics of countries and regions of the world, often to raise public awareness or to influence specific governments.Political scientists may provide the frameworks from which journalists, special interest groups, politicians, and the electorate analyze issues. According to Chaturvedy,

Political scientists may serve as advisers to specific politicians, or even run for office as politicians themselves. Political scientists can be found working in governments, in political parties, or as civil servants. They may be involved with non-governmental organizations (NGOs) or political movements. In a variety of capacities, people educated and trained in political science can add value and expertise to corporations. Private enterprises such as think tanks, research institutes, polling and public relations firms often employ political scientists.


=== Country-specific studies ===
Political scientists may study political phenomena within one specific country. For example, they may study just the politics of the United States or just the politics of China.Political scientists look at a variety of data, including constitutions, elections, public opinion, and public policy, foreign policy, legislatures, and judiciaries. Political scientists will often focus on the politics of their own country; for example, a political scientist from Indonesia may become an expert in the politics of Indonesia.


=== Anticipating crises ===
The theory of political transitions, and the methods of analyzing and anticipating crises, form an important part of political science. Several general indicators of crises and methods were proposed for anticipating critical transitions. Among them, one statistical indicator of crisis, a simultaneous increase of variance and correlations in large groups, was proposed for crisis anticipation and may be successfully used in various areas. Its applicability for early diagnosis of political crises was demonstrated by the analysis of the prolonged stress period preceding the 2014 Ukrainian economic and political crisis. There was a simultaneous increase in the total correlation between the 19 major public fears in the Ukrainian society (by about 64%) and in their statistical dispersion (by 29%) during the pre-crisis years. A feature shared by certain major revolutions is that they were not predicted. The theory of apparent inevitability of crises and revolutions was also developed.The study of major crises, both political crises and external crises that can affect politics, is not limited to attempts to predict regime transitions or major changes in political institutions. Political scientists also study how governments handle unexpected disasters, and how voters in democracies react to their governments' preparations for and responses to crises.


== Subfields and Cognate fields ==
Furthermore, political science is related to, draws upon, and exchanges information with the fields of economics, law, sociology, management, history, philosophy, criminology and the sociology of law, geography, anthropology, psychology, communication studies, human resource management (HR as applied to public administration), business administration (e.g. within the business-to-government industry) and environmental studies; it also makes up a portion of the interdisciplinary fields of global studies, social work, urban planning, intelligence studies, management, and peace and conflict studies.


=== Subfields ===
Many that work in the field of political science practice, research, use skills, techniques, education, and experience in the areas described below:
Political philosophy: Concerned with the foundations of political community and institutions, while focusing on human nature and the moral purposes of political association.
Political methodology: Studies the philosophical bases of social science, political science, empirical research design and analysis.Psephology, also known as Political Analysis: is the "quantitative analysis of elections and balloting".
Political forecasting:  aims at forecasting the outcomes of political events.
Comparative politics: Compares contemporary political systems and discovers general laws and theories.
International relations: Concerned with developing an understanding of why states and non-state international actors interact.
Security Studies: studies organized violence, military conflict, national security, and international security.
Intelligence Studies: field of education dealing with intelligence assessments and intelligence analysis.
Foreign policy analysis: a technique dealing with theory, development, and empirical study regarding the processes and outcomes of foreign policy.Public Policy and Public Administration - encompassing both Public Policy and Public Administration - : the implementation of public policy, administration of government establishment (public governance), management of non-profit establishment (nonprofit governance), and also a subfield of political science taught in public policy schools that studies this implementation and prepares people, especially civil servants in administrative positions for working in the public sector, voluntary sector, some industries in the private sector dealing with government relations, regulatory affairs, legislative assistance, corporate social responsibility (CSR), environmental, social, governance (ESG), public procurement (PP), public-private partnerships (P3), and business-to-government marketing/sales (B2G) as well as those working at think tanks, non-profit organizations, consulting firms, trade associations, or in other positions that uses similar skills found in public administration  Some of the various definitions that have been offered for the term are "the management of public programs"; the "translation of politics into the reality that citizens see every day"; and "the study of government decision making, the analysis of the policies themselves, the various inputs that have produced them, and the inputs necessary to produce alternative policies."Policy analysis and program evaluation:
Policy analysis is a technique used in public administration to enable civil servants, activists, and others to examine and evaluate the available options to implement the goals of laws and elected officials.
Program evaluation: a systematic method for collecting, analyzing, and using information to answer questions about projects, policies, and programs, particularly about their effectiveness and efficiency. In both the public and private sectors, stakeholders often want to know whether the programs they are funding, implementing, voting for, receiving, or objecting to are producing the intended effect. While program evaluation first focuses on this definition, important considerations often include how much the program costs per participant, how the program could be improved, whether the program is worthwhile, whether there are better alternatives, whether there are unintended outcomes, and whether the program goals are appropriate and useful.
Organizational theory in public administration is the study of the structure of governmental entities and the many particulars inculcated in them.
Ethics in public administration serves as a normative approach to decision making.
Public budgeting and Public finance:
Public budgeting is the activity within a government that seeks to allocate scarce resources among unlimited demands.
Public finance is the study of the role of the government in the economy. It is the branch of economics that assesses the government revenue and government expenditure of the public authorities and the adjustment of one or the other to achieve desirable effects and avoid undesirable ones.
Human resource management in public administration is an in-house structure that ensures that public service staffing is done in an unbiased, ethical, and values-based manner. The basic functions of the HR system are employee benefits, employee health care, compensation, and many more (e.g., human rights, Americans with Disabilities Act). The executives managing the HR director and other key departmental personnel are also part of the public administration system.
Nonprofit management is research into the practice of operating nonprofit organizations and their effects.
Emergency management is the managerial function charged with creating the framework within which communities reduce vulnerability to hazards and cope with disasters.Other notable subdisciplines are domestic politics and government, social policy, and urban policy, while many more subject-matter areas like these can be constructed by combining the skills and practices of the other major sub-disciplines at different levels of intensity to solve specific problems or understand specific phenomena.Some political science departments also classify political methodology as well as scholarship on the domestic politics of a particular country as sub-distinct fields. In the United States, American politics is often treated as a separate subfield. 
In contrast to this traditional classification some academic departments organize scholarship into thematic categories, including political philosophy, political behavior (including public opinion, collective action, and identity), and political institutions (including legislatures and international organizations). Political science conferences and journals often emphasize scholarship in more specific categories. The American Political Science Association, for example, has 42 organized sections that address various methods and topics of political inquiry.


=== Cognate fields ===
Global studies
Law
Public law
Administrative law
Constitutional law
International law
Criminal Justice
Criminology
Sociology of Law
Legal management (academic discipline) and Paralegal Studies
Administration of justice
Urban planning
Urban planning education
Urban studies
Geography
Economics
Communication studies
Journalism
Political communications
Communications
Social work
Peace and conflict studies
Intelligence studies
Data science
Public health
Business administration
Business-to-government (B2G) marketing and sales
Public procurement
Environmental studies
Environmental science
Civil engineering
Industrial engineering
Systems engineering
Human resource management
Operations research


== Research methods ==

Political science is methodologically diverse and appropriates many methods originating in psychology, social research, political philosophy, and many others, in addition to those that developed chiefly within the field of political science. Approaches include positivism, interpretivism, rational choice theory, behaviouralism, structuralism, post-structuralism, realism, institutionalism, pluralism, organizational theory, management theory, public administration theory, international relations theory, and the intelligence cycle. Political science, as one of the social sciences, uses methods and techniques that relate to the kinds of inquires sought: primary sources, such as historical documents and official records, secondary sources such as scholarly journal articles, as well as techniques and skills such as survey research, statistical analysis, quantitative analysis (finance), qualitative research, comparative research, operations research, systems analysis, case studies, experimental research, project management, model building, and others more so unique to the field like  policy analysis, program evaluation, foreign policy analysis, psephology or political analysis, intelligence analysis, and political forecasting.Political scientists approach the study of politics from a host of different ontological orientations and with a variety of different tools. Because political science is essentially a study of human behavior, in all aspects of politics, observations in controlled environments are often challenging to reproduce or duplicate, though experimental methods are increasingly common (see experimental political science). Citing this difficulty, former American Political Science Association President Lawrence Lowell once said "We are limited by the impossibility of experiment. Politics is an observational, not an experimental science." Because of this, political scientists have historically observed political elites, institutions, and individual or group behaviour in order to identify patterns, draw generalizations, and build theories of politics.
Like all social sciences, political science faces the difficulty of observing human actors that can only be partially observed and who have the capacity for making conscious choices, unlike other subjects, such as non-human organisms in biology, minerals in geoscience, chemical elements in chemistry, stars in astronomy, or particles in physics. Despite the complexities, contemporary political science has progressed by adopting a variety of methods and theoretical approaches to understanding politics, and methodological pluralism is a defining feature of contemporary political science.
Empirical political science methods include the use of field experiments, surveys and survey experiments, case studies, process tracing, historical and institutional analysis, ethnography, participant observation, and interview research.Political scientists also use and develop theoretical tools like game theory and agent-based models to study a host of political systems and situations.Political theorists approach theories of political phenomena with a similar diversity of positions and tools, including feminist political theory, historical analysis associated with the Cambridge school, and Straussian approaches.
Political science may overlap with topics of study that are the traditional focuses of other social sciences—for example, when sociological norms or psychological biases are connected to political phenomena. In these cases, political science may either inherit their methods of study or develop a contrasting approach. For example, Lisa Wedeen has argued that political science's approach to the idea of culture, originating with Gabriel Almond and Sidney Verba and exemplified by authors like Samuel P. Huntington, could benefit from aligning more closely with the study of culture in anthropology. In turn, methodologies that are developed within political science may influence how researchers in other fields, like public health, conceive of and approach political processes and policies.


== Education ==

Political science, possibly like the social sciences as a whole, can be described "as a discipline which lives on the fault line between the 'two cultures' in the academy, the sciences and the humanities." Thus, in most American colleges, especially liberal arts colleges it would be located within the school or college of arts and sciences, if no separate college of arts and sciences exist or if the college or university prefers that it be in a separate constituent college or academic department, political science may be a separate department housed as part of a division or school of humanities or liberal arts while at some universities, especially research universities and in particular those that have a strong cooperation between research, undergraduate, and graduate faculty with a stronger more applied emphasis in public administration, political science would be taught by the university's public policy school. Aspects of political science can be taught as part of a liberal arts education, as part of a professional development/professional school education, or as part of both.Most United States colleges and universities offer BA programs in political science. MA or MAT and PhD or EdD programs are common at larger universities. The term political science is more popular in post-1960s North America than elsewhere while universities predating the 1960s or those historically influenced by them would call the field of study government; other institutions, especially those outside the United States, see political science as part of a broader discipline of political studies or politics in general. While political science implies the use of the scientific method, political studies implies a broader approach, although the naming of degree courses does not necessarily reflect their content. Separate, specialized, or in some cases professional degree programs in international relations, public policy, and public administration, are not uncommon at both the undergraduate and postgraduate levels, although most but not all undergraduate level education in these sub-fields of political science are generally found in academic concentration within a political science academic major. Master's-level programs in public administration are professional degrees covering public policy along with other applied subjects; they are often seen as more linked to politics than any other discipline, which may be reflected by being housed in that department.The main national honor society for college and university students of government and politics in the United States is Pi Sigma Alpha, while Pi Alpha Alpha is a national honor society specifically designated for public administration. 


== Writing ==
There are different genres of writings in political science with both academic writing and professional writing being in existence; including but not limited to:

Argument essays, academic literature, term papers, research papers, political theory writing, articles, texts, reflective papers, capstone projects, responses to such, and responses to events and real-world problems.
Case studies
Memoranda
Content writing
Policy analysis
Position papers
Reports
Intelligence assessments
White papers and Gray literature
Legal briefs and Amicus curiae
Grant writing
Legislation and Regulations
Social research
Strategic communications (In political, legal, non-profit, non-governmental, lobbying, and public diplomacy settings it makes a part of an entity's overall strategy in influencing public opinion, public policy, grant making, fundraising, law, regulations, legislation, or a specific decision or ruling in a legal case, and to enhance its strategic positioning in order to carry out its mission). 
Marketing collateralThe most common piece of academic writing in generalist political sciences are research papers, which investigate an original research question


== See also ==
Comparative politics
History of political science
International relations
Outline of political science – structured list of political topics, arranged by subject area
Index of politics articles – alphabetical list of political subjects
Political history of the world
Political lists – lists of political topics
Political philosophy
Political identity


== References ==


== Further reading ==


== External links ==


=== Professional organizations ===
European Consortium for Political Research
Institute for Comparative Research in Human and Social Sciences (ICR) in Japan
International Association for Political Science Students
International Political Science Association
International Studies Association
Midwest Political Science Association
Political Studies Association of the UK
Southern Political Science Association


=== Further reading ===
IPSAPortal: Top 300 websites for Political Science
Observatory of International Research (OOIR): Latest Papers and Trends in Political Science
PROL: Political Science Research Online (prepublished research)


=== Library guides ===
Library. "Political Science". Research Guides. Michigan: University of Michigan. Archived from the original on 7 July 2014. Retrieved 15 February 2014.
Bodleian Libraries. "Political Science". LibGuides. UK: University of Oxford. Archived from the original on 18 February 2014. Retrieved 15 February 2014.
Library. "Politics Research Guide". LibGuides. New Jersey: Princeton University. Archived from the original on 23 July 2014. Retrieved 15 February 2014.
Libraries. "Political Science". Research Guides. New York: Syracuse University. Archived from the original on 8 July 2014. Retrieved 15 February 2014.
University Libraries. "Political Science". Research Guides. Texas: Texas A&M University. Archived from the original on 21 October 2014. Retrieved 15 February 2014.